I never knew I was into shipping as
much as I apparently am until I, well,
found out what shipping was. My whole life I’d
been shipping characters with one another because,
as a gay kid, how the hell else was I
supposed to have gay characters in anything?
The Ryan Murphy-verse was a good two decades
away so gay characters in movies and tv
were pretty damn rare. Unless they were
dying of aids or a coded serial killer.
So instead, my innocent little brain turned
elsewhere for gay relationships. Funnily enough,
as someone who’s said multiple times over the
past couple of years that I was never that
big a fan of anime, my first big ships came from
anime. Namely Gohan and Trunks from DragonBall Z
(yes, I know there’s a problematic age difference
but there’s also time travel so leave me alone),
as well as Heero and Duo, and
Trowa and Qautre from Gundam Wing.
And who can forget my first rivals to
boyfriends pairing, Matt and Tai from Digimon.
Never once in any of these series
are any of these characters even
hinted at being gay. But did I
care? Hell no. They were in love,
and you were not going to tell my prepubescent
brain otherwise. Especially Matt and Tai.
That was a ship that could weather any storm.
It got a lot easier when Queer as Folk came
on TV and the gay pairings were made obvious.
Around the time Queer as Folk started
airing I also started watching more
“adult” media. Deciding wholeheartedly that I was
going to go to film school, I started watching the
classics. Gone with the Wind, Citizen Kane, Whose
Afraid of Viginia Woolf, The Boys in the Sand.
You know, real proper cinema. Not
those silly cartoons from Japan.
And then after finishing film school I spent
another decade married to the idea that I was too
good for anything but the best of cinema (becoming
a huge David Fincher stan in the process).
And then, accidentally, I was exposed to the
torid world of shipping once again. When I,
despite not having seen any other MCU movies, went
to see Captain America on opening night. Because,
you know, Chris Evans.
And I left that theatre absolutely, utterly,
convinced that Steve Rogers and Bucky Barnes were
in love. It was so clear! Steve flew a plane into
an arctic ice-cap instead of being with a woman,
but tried everything to save Bucky. It
had to be true! It was so obvious. There
must be other people on the internet
seeing the same way that I was feeling.
And there was. And they’d even seen gay
relationships in media I hadn’t read into!
Oh my god, you’re right!
Sherlock is totally queer!
Remus and Sirius? Of course! Sirius,
The confirmed bachelor, and Remus,
the guy who didnt even contemplate
being with a girl until Sirius was dead.
Xena and Gabrielle. How the hell had I
never seen that before?! Was I blind?!
There were so many examples, and whole mythologies
worth of fan fiction, or slash fiction,
describing how these couples worked. I
even spotted some Matt and Tai stuff.
So yeah, I found out that shipping was
a thing. Never been the same since.
One thing that they will not, under
any circumstances, teach you in college
is that we owe the bulk of
humanity’s literature to plagiarism.
Heracles was a pan-hellenic hero who was the
focus and topic of plays and poems for the
duration of ancient Greece, but also throughout
Rome. And then kind of moved into being this
point of reference for heroic stories in
the Middle Ages of Europe and Byzantium.
It’s unlikely that whoever was the first to write
about Heracles was the only one developing content
about the character in their own lifetime. But
in ancient cultures, they also didn’t hold the
same values about intellectual property
as we do now. Because there was no central
institution about owning copyright, they did not
really believe that one could own a character.
Especially when a core component
of Heracles is that he is the son
of Zeus. Zeus, who was the chief deity of a
religion. It would be like Disney making a story
about Jesus’s bumbling younger brother, Bob. And
then trying to copyright “Jesus” as a character.
Keep in mind, Disney is the same company that
tried to file copyright claims on ‘Odin,’
‘Loki’ and ‘Thor.’ Because, yes, they have
several movies featuring characters of those names
who draw influence from the Norse pantheon.
However, in copyright law, there would not
be a clear way to distinguish the ‘Odin’ in
Disney movies from the ‘Odin’ of mythology.
In writing, at least. Because Marvel’s Odin has a
look. But when copyrighting the name itself, that
could get messy. Because… Odin is still openly
revered in parts of the world — namely Iceland.
Norse beliefs are still openly
practised, and what happens when
you pay homage to a god whose likeness
is owned by an American media monopoly?
To say nothing of Wagner’s Ring Cycle and
other prominent media about Norse Mythology.
Would Disney own copyright on those characters?
Also the fact that Marvel’s Odin is based on a
comic book character which was created in the
1960s by Stan Lee, who passed away recently.
Indicating that… ownership of the comic book
Thor… is not necessarily ownership of Movie Thor…
Which brings to me a question
of… when — or how — movie Thor
could ever pass into public domain? Will he
enter public domain at the same time as Comic
book Thor? And like… given that they’re all based
on characters who were already in public domain…
See — Jack Kirby got around this problem by
making all the Eternals’ names slightly
different than their modern spellings.
—————
ETERNALS   — Thena: “It’s
just ‘Thena.’ Drop the A.”
—————
But in the antiquated world, they didn’t
even bother with these hang-ups. Using
another creator’s creations was seen as a kind
of reverence to the original poet, playwright,
or bard. In fact, even writing under their name
was seen as an homage — for instance, there’s
some scholarly debate if the Odyssey was written
by Homer, or if it was written after his death.
But the fact that we, in our modern society, do
have copyright laws should automatically signal
just how natural it seems to us to simply
appropriate existing fiction into new fiction.
Though the phrase is mistakenly associated
with Picasso, the phrase ‘Good artists create;
Great artists steal’ seems to be the lynchpin
that literary traditions have been built off of.
Every great Greek and Roman play was
constructed on a mythological cycle
that had existed for centuries prior.
The Divine Comedy and Paradise Lost,
were both built off of
Christian myth and folklore.
So yes… as most of literature exists because
it was, as it would be considered now,
a kind of fan-fiction — shipping, by
extension, is also a valid method of
narrative creation. Half of Greek myth is
shipping. Pairing off different Gods, Kings,
Heroes, and Deities together is the backbone of
the mythological cycle. It’s how Gods like Pan,
Zagreus, and even Aphrodite have
uncertain or conflicting parentage.
In our society, perhaps more so out
of a need to categorise everything and
less out of respect, we consider
the creator to be the authority on
a creation, even after they’re long dead
and their creations are used by the masses.
As an example: it doesn’t really matter which
version of Sherlock Holmes we’re observing,
we generally default to Sir Aurther Conan
Doyle as the authority on the figure,
in a way we do not generally attribute creative
licences made by Stephen Moffat as ‘canonical.’
So in a classical context, there was little to
no friction when using other writers’ characters.
In part, because most of the
characters worth referencing
had been created hundreds if
not thousands of years before.
But in a modern context, you know. Copyright
— for better and for worse. I mean, I think
there’s a lot of ways that copyright does
protect creators, but there are ways that
corporations and well-known, fabulously
wealthy creators abuse it. Given that
media awareness has shifted from the classics
to contemporary characters, if you want to
write about characters that already exist, as
the vast majority of writers in history have,
these days, you are probably writing about
characters that are protected by copyright.
Which even though all that usually means is that
you can’t make money off of what you’re writing,
that really doesn’t seem to deter people. Popular
fanfiction websites like Archive of Our Own get a
dizzying amount of content every
day. If ever there was an argument
against people acting exclusively
for profit it would be fanfiction.
One of the most popular forms of which is taking
central characters and putting them in romantic
entanglements with either characters in the
plot with whom they shared good chemistry,
or inventing entirely new characters.
This is what is referred to as
‘shipping.’ As per a relation-ship.
These are non-canonical relationships
that make up the bulk of fanfiction now,
and throughout literature. It can be
argued that all fanfiction is, in some way
‘shipping.’ Because fanfiction changes the way
in which characters interact with each-other.
And even though there’s a kind of literary
stigma against fanfiction in general,
though specifically shipping, there are
elements of society that can find a use for it.
YOU may not be able to get paid
for your ships and fan fiction,
but that shouldn’t suggest that there
isn’t money to be made off of it somehow.
It’s just a question of who
gets that money and how.
Though shipping has its roots in
antiquity, there is a somewhat
concrete instance for when it shifted into
the modern world. And it was actually earlier
than most people would expect — Kirk and
Spock from the original star trek series.
This was a unique instance of
shipping for several reasons,
though namely the fact that it was not a ship
that was done with characters in public domain.
This was based around contemporary characters
whose personalities and plots were unfolding over
three seasons. Fans had something
new and tangible to cling on to,
with promises of new material to come that
would further enrich the fictional romance.
And, for those in the 60s and even today,
the romantic and/or sexual tension
between Kirk and Spock was palpable.
It may not be right to say that it was the
first ship in a given fandom. There may
have been local book clubs which chose to read
into the companionship between Sam and Frodo,
for instance. However, Star Trek was one
of the first fictional properties to host
significantly large conventions
for the fandom at large.
The open-venue atmosphere generated a place
to find like-minded niches within the fandom,
which, itself, was niche. Finding queer or
queer-friendly fans who openly read into latent,
perhaps unintentional queerness
was easier than it had ever been.
So in an era before the internet,
developing these physical spaces was
necessary for developing fan theories and having
head-cannon spread throughout the entire fanbase.
Head-cannon, for reference, is an element of
the story that, while not confirmed or able
to be confirmed by the creator, is a theory, or a
story that the majority of a fanbase has accepted.
For more on the Star Trek shipping phenomen
check out Jessie Gender’s video linked below.
So how do we go from fans filling in the
blanks in a fictitious social-utopia — to
me having very conflicting gay thoughts
about a popular anime about skateboarding?
One that leans on a shonan aesthetic
for extra flavour, but owing most
of it’s popularity to multiple ambiguously
obvious queer relationships. And a cat boy.
This is the future progressives are giving you.
Sk8 The Infinity is a 2021
Anime directed by Hikoro Utsumi,
the director of similarly queer baited and shipped
anime Free! and Banana Fish. Sk8 tells the story
of Reki, a Japanese teenager obsessed with
skateboarding, and Langa, a Japanese Canadian
who used to be a championship snowboarder
until the death of his father. The pair meet
up and Langa discovers that skateboarding
isn’t that different from snowboarding!
It actually is but let’s go with it.
Together they start attending underground
skateboarding tournaments called S,
organised by Adam, an embezzling
businessman in Digimon villain drag.
In an oddly generous offering of gay ships,
Sk8 serves up not one by three potential gay
pairings for fans to write and create art about.
First up we’ve got the main pair Reki and Langa.
While it all began at least
sort of casually - they were
classmates before becoming friends – their
relationship eventually grew into some more…
close. Something more close — let’s go
with close. However, fans immediately
started seeing a lot of the hints that Reki and
Langa might wind up as more than just friends,
but this never officially happened, of course,
leaving the fans no choice but to ship them.
Next up we’ve got Joe and Cherry, or as
they’re fondly known online: Cherry Blossom,
or matchablossom. These two appear to be a real
couple in every way, yet they refuse to admit it.
It’s beyond easy to read into the
idea that these two were once an item,
broke up, and now simultaneously
love and hate each other.
But mostly love. They bicker like a married
couple, act as surrogate parents to our
younger group of skaters, and have a tumultuous
past relationship with Myotismon over here.
Speaking of Adam. He’s a part of the
third ship in the series along with
his personal assistant, Tadashi.
A pairing the internet has named…
LoveDog. If you’ve seen the show you know why.
This is… a problematic yet obvious ship. It’s
clear that these two have some kind of
relationship beyond official duties, but
goddamn it’s abusive! I’ve already made three
videos about abusive gay relationships in media so
I’m not going to go into the gritty details. But
there is some hardcore gaslighting going on here.
But let’s focus on our main
pair. Reki and Langa. Since
they’re the whole reason I’m making this video.
Throughout the series these two are given
multiple moments scientifically designed
to urge on the potential shippers. Whether it’s
Reki teaching Langa how to skateboard in a really
cute montage, or Langa’s now notorious
“Reki, my love (of skateboarding)” line.
As the series progresses Reki becomes
more and more a cheerleader of Langa,
ever more enthusiastic, even though
Langa is much more reserved and shy.
Until the final episode when he excitedly
jumps into Reki’s arms after winning a race.
The pair even play out a typical
rom-com break up scenario as the show
crests into the third act. But don’t worry
they get back together. That’s when they
create a special fist bump that, YOU KNOW,
if one of them was a girl that damn fist
bump woulda been a kiss. It’s their way
of kissing. Am I the only one seeing—
This is also when Langa realises how
important their friendship is and tells Reki,
“Let’s do it. I want to
skate infinitely with you.”
(Blank stare)
“That sounded like a marriage proposal”
So on one hand Sk8 the Infinity has a very
simple, if not entirely unremarkable plot.
It’s a typical rookie-makes-the-big-leagues
narrative. You can pretty much assume the broad
strokes and outcomes of almost every set-up.
It’s the relationships that make it stand out.
Sk8 shines in the grace notes and nuances
that build the story. What’s really meant
to be entertaining, animation aside, are
the colourful characters, sardonic comedy,
wild antics, a couple of neurodivergent characters
who find a peer group that accepts them (which is
one of the more touching elements
of the story, actually) and,
the adorable boys being boys and doing
boy things. Very… heterosexual boy things.
Oh look a catboy.
And, in spite of what issues
with the show that I bring up,
my opinion of it remains
net-positive… Conditionally.
The series doesn’t seem entirely sure whether
it wants to conform to rookie-narrative tropes
or subvert them. A lot of the time the
show wants to push an emotional moment
for the sake of driving characters' pathos.
But then usually will turn right around
and break the in-universe rules
about how fast skateboards can go.
But this is forgivable because
when it comes to this anime,
actual skateboarding is ironically one of the
last things you’re meant to pay attention to.
Another difficulty the show tends to have
is saying one thing in spoken dialogue,
but completely rebutting that
message with visuals and plot beats.
While on one hand Reki’s personal narrative is
partly about him coming to terms with the fact
that he doesn’t need to be the best skateboarder.
That he has value on and off of the track.
On the other hand Reki is given this pep-talk by
a character — the owner of a skate shop — who is…
basically not in the plot. And then immediately
after that, Reki decides he wants to
skateboard-race Adam, who, in a prior race, served
him a broken arm and a molestation allegory.
Trauma which was there to
drive interpersonal drama,
but then disappeared when it was
no longer convenient to the plot.
This has some really dodgy subtext when it comes
to villains. But this — this isn’t that video.
This video is about the subtext you’re
meant to read into. The shipping.
Turns out the shonen anime’s take on the
Japanese skateboarding is that everybody’s gay.
“HEY BITCHES, BROS, AND NONBINARY HOES.”
Like… if you’re going to make the villain
woke and awesome at the same time, can we
ease off the assault and battery against minors?
And the… creepy obsession he has with teenagers?
I really wanted to LIKE him but
like… it’s just so uncomfortable.
But right, the non-problematic couple.
There’s an entire industry of buzz built around
the ways in which these homo-ambiguous teenagers
are almost a gay couple. Articles on websites as
disparate as CBR.com, Kotoku, and The Advocate.
And the fervour of this community on
twitter, reddit, and fan-discords may
very well be a pivotal reason why this show
has risen to the kind of popularity it has.
There’s even a two night
stage show for god’s sake.
That I really wanna see. COVID, can
you go away I really wanna see that.
This media knows you’re going to ship these
characters… in fact, it seems to be expected.
We, the audience, are expected
to read into the suggested ship,
to draw fan art, to write fan fiction, to
engage in an entire constructed community
around how these two characters would
interact if the ship was cannon.
And how… do we feel about that?
Why couldn’t we just get the gay sk8er boys?
Why couldn’t we get the gay sk8er dads?
It seems clear that not only does the audience
want this, but that the studio knows this and
wants to play to that audience. If
everyone wants it… why hold back?
What’s the rationale? What’s the reason? It seems
that the queerness is being deliberately withheald
where it would otherwise fit into
the plot. And if this is deliberate,
then we can gauge the ethical
merits of the situation.
Really… Sk8 doesn’t seem like the kind of series
that would spurr on an hour long discussion about
ethics of representation. But as much as the
writing does seem to be on the wall about gay
coupling in this show, it is — once again
— a big load of ‘almost’ representation.
And the show goes pretty far to ‘almost’ show gay
romance. But it’s that last ten yards that we’re
not crossing for some reason. So what’s stopping
media like this from making the final step?
My theory is that shipping is a
component of audience engagement
that is filling in for something that
mass media has lost: merchandising.
Seeing how merchandising and boys’ love (or
more commonly known as BL because it sounds
less creepy) are both things that saw great
advancement within Japanese media in the 1990s,
it’s probably best to start there.
There had been times when Anime had broken into
American Airwaves, like Astro Boy, Speed Racer,
Simba (i mean Kimba), and Sailor Moon. And anime
from the 80s like Akira have been incredibly
influential in modern Hollywood. However, among
consumer masses, nothing hit quite like Pokémon.
It used to be that cartoons made for kids were
created solely as 20 minute commercials to sell
you toys. Like with the transformers series.
For a couple years Transformers dominated toy
shelves and Television. It was Pokémon
before Pokémon. But Pokémon… has been
around for twenty years. So has Transformers —
longer, actually — but Pokémon never went away.
Pokémon was a game-changer, not
only because it was an anime
tie-in to a video game that was already
popular, but it was incredibly toyetic.
And being able to make toys from characters,
creatures, and objects in a piece of visual
media is something that American companies had
proven to be cash cows before. Look at Star Wars.
With this merchandising angle, a producer
can double or even quintuple income by
constructing an ongoing series in a way
where the plot is intrinsically tied
to something that can very
easily be made into a toy.
Especially when you have a way to
refresh the toy line every few years.
But where Pokémon was more successful... is how
characters were so simple and so recognizable
that you can stick them on a T-shirt and everyone
will know its Pikachu. Whereas, to the layman,
Starscream and Megatron might not be
so easy to tell apart in robot form.
There’s another problematic ship for you.
When it comes to Pokémon, enter the
Japanese word and concept — kawaii.
Contrary to popular belief, kawaii does not mean
‘cute.’ It means something much deeper. When
something is kawaii, it means that it cannot
not be cute. It means that this idol has been
reduced to a state of existence where the ONLY
opinion that can exist about it is that it’s cute.
Pokémon is a prime example, specifically with
mascot characters like Pikachu, Bulbasaur, Eevee —
and nearly all first-stage evolutions. But the
example that typifies this process is Hello Kitty.
Hello Kitty, as a brand, is fascinating,
but I won’t get into it here.
Hold on, I need my cat ears—
Hello Kitty didn’t even have a piece of media
it was attached to right away, but this little
cartoon kitty seemed to be like something you
would see in a TV special. But it wasn’t until
the brand was already a national sensation
in Japan that there was any visual media.
The process that makes Hello Kitty kawaii
is an aesthetic exercise in minimalism and
abstractism. You take a cat, and you gradually
reduce features until you have a bare minimum
amount of details that allow you to recognize
this as a cat. Or Keroppi as a frog. Et cetera.
With so little features, this is
not just a cat. Your imagination
makes you pack-bond with the idea of a cat.
But when it comes to using toyetics
to sell a given brand… well,
Pokémon did it so well that nothing else
has managed to come close. Even Disney.
And Pokémon has only been around
half as long as Hello Kitty.
It’s still not clear — even to cultural
analysts — why or how Pokémon completely
dominated culture to the point of traumatising
Burger King employees. Things were ‘cute’ before
Pokémon. Things have been ‘cute’ after Pokémon.
So it's not really clear why it stands out.
But as Pokémon was first
and foremost a video game,
it managed to retain its market
relevance as a video game when
kids began making the christmas-list
switch from action figures to games.
It’s difficult to make a cartoon or anime with
a strong merchandise tie-in because video games
occupy so much of the childrens’ market now.
Pokémon endured because there was a monopoly.
It’s almost not fair for any franchise to assess
its success if Pokémon is seen as the standard.
We’re not here to talk about Pokémon — an anime
with actually visible queer representation.
We’re here to talk about how Pokémon’s industry
dominance has made it difficult for new media
to focus their branding strategy around
merchandising visually-distinct elements.
So for lack of up-front merchandisable effigies,
how can you really make your media stick?
Well, that’s where shipping ties in…
I’m sure more than a few marketing directors
noticed that there was a pattern of how certain
media developed cult followings. Sometimes a
TV series or movie will manage to stand the
test of time specifically because it has
a strong gay or gay-friendly following.
And this following is full of shippers. And
when your audience is taking to social media to
discuss non-canonical relationship dynamics,
you can say that they’re pretty engaged.
As online fan communities dedicated themselves to
filling in the blanks with fanfiction and fan art,
networks across Japan and America
realised they didn’t need a line of toys
to tie-in to their franchise. An engaged
audience is one that keeps tuning in,
which means a longer-running
show and increased ad revenue.
And apparently a stage production.
Branding executives said: “hold on a second…
let’s lean into it and see what happens?”
Queer… became the new kawaii.
And maybe that was even better
because there’s a whole lot less
commitment involved in putting two young
men in suggestively romantic situations
than hiring an entire design team to create
and focus-group a number of mascot figures
in the hopes that just one of them would
break through into cultural permeance.
Similar to how kawaii functions by
minimalizing and removing features,
so does the process of gay-baiting.
You take what is ostensibly a romance between
two people. Whether it’s a gender-swap straight
romance dynamic, or two bros who are too
close to function. And then you remove
explicitly romantic language until
there is plausible deniability.
What remains in the plot is a
collection of romantic visual cues,
a very hot, intense, dedication, and devoted
personal investment between two characters. Now,
ships can take many forms — even in Sk8.
You’ve got the strong, pining commitment, but you
also have the more distant, nobody-else-but-you,
friend-rivals who rush to each other's side
when the other gets physically assaulted in
a skateboard race… which everyone
seems perfectly fine with, by the
way. You also have the abusive relationship
with suggested ‘he can change’ tenderness.
And you even have an alluded bitter
friends-to-enemies scenario. With a catboy.
It’s hard to really gauge what exact
qualities a pairing needs to have to be
shippable, because everyone has their
preferred ship dynamic and honestly…
I think at this point people will ship any
two-or-more characters for any reason. Just
look at Avatar the Last Airbender and Legend
of Kora. There really aren’t any limits.
What two characters do need
to have to get shipped is just
literally any kind of chemistry.
But this chemistry needs to be BIG.
And of course I’m not saying ‘modern shipping
bad.’ There are plenty of examples in media
where you have two characters who are meant
to be just friends. Believe it or not,
there is still a demand for straight romances and
creators willing to depict them. I know! I know…
As a result, there are a lot of instances where
a creator makes a property with no intended queer
reading, for which there is an audience who
fully enjoys shipping two men in the plot.
The thing about Sk8 is that there’s a lot
in here that’s genuinely entertaining.
Great comedic timing, coupled with a carnivalesque
approach to mixing skateboard culture,
shonen melodrama, and good ol’ camp.
That said. Would I have watched it if it wasn’t
for people recommending it to me
because of the queer references?
… No. No… p… probably would not.
When it comes to media I do consume,
I just gravitate towards gay stuff.
Sorry. I spent the first 25 years of my life
being dominated by heterosexual characters.
And now that I’m making the decision to consume
media about characters with whom I can identity…
…I’m still consuming straight meida.
Because in spite of the fact that Sk8 goes out
of it’s way to imply that multiple characters
are in queer pairings, it also goes out
of it’s way to ‘confirm’ heterosexuality
of one half of each couple. Either
Reki’s random fawning over the girl
in one episode for five minutes,
or Joe’s chronic boob’d arm candy.
Funnily — the implicit ship that there isn’t any
heterosexuality confirmation is… the villain.
The villain who openly admits to
‘loving’ underage skater-boys.
Which happens to be a recurring pattern within…
media.. in general. For decades! The gay predator:
still at large in 2022.
Even if the heroes are implied to be gay,
the villain has the most
pluasibly confirmed queerness.
I’m not willing to say that this is carrying
deliberate homophobic subtextual messaging,
though there is a role that bigotry
has in modern queer baiting.
But when it comes to Adam from
Sk8 or Gozine from Banana Fish,
their queerness, is much more explicit
than that of our more understated heroes.
Compare and contrast to Yuri!!! On
ICE. We’re already talking about Anime,
might as well jump in. And yes, I’ve already
talked about it, but that shouldn’t suggest
I don’t have evolving feelings on it.
I praised Yuri on Ice for it’s
subtle representation of queerness,
and I thought it was a greater asset than it
was a detractor. Could it have used a kiss…?
Without the arm blocking the way? Yes. But Yuri
on Ice was also missing a lot of the staples of
the other gay-baits. Mainly, that there was
no third-wheel heterosexual love intrest.
And of characters who could be considered
antagonists, Yuri-o softens as he begins to
come into his budding, if only implied, attraction
to Otabek. (Though how implied is this REALLY?)
And when it comes to JJ. Well,
he’s straight, they can have him.
And I’m not completely absolving
Yuri On Ice for concealing queerness,
but it does seem like I’m pointing out that there
are many ways that queer-baiting can happen.
Bear in mind that there is not as much
‘shipping’ of Yuri and Victor as there is
with Reki and Langa. By all means, it’s there. But
as someone who is not particularly involved in any
shipping communities, there is not nearly as much
spill-over for Yuri on Ice as there is for Sk8.
It’s also interesting that the 2016 Yuri on
Ice shippers went over to Killing Stalking,
but we won’t talk about that.
And this isn’t to speak of the popularity
of either series, because years after the
fact… and Yuri on Ice still seems to
retain it’s popularity along side Sk8,
which came out just this past year.
A distinction can be made where Yuri on
Ice, while being much more understated,
seems to want to imply that these
characters ARE in a relationship.
Whereas Sk8 is going out of it’s way to imply
that it’s characters COULD BE in a relationship.
And if we’re interested in getting
into the nuance, there is a difference
between an implication and a
suggestion. As a matter of fact,
I can sort queer-implied character
pairings into four groups.
Of the ones I find tolerable…
We have Accidental Ships are when you
have a creator who is making no effort
to really depict queerness.
They’re just making some art,
and their audience takes it upon themselves
to read into the chemistry between two given
characters. Prime example would be Sokka
and Zuko from Avatar the Last Air Bender.
Subversive Ships are when a creator actively wants
to depict queer characters, but is restricted
either by network morality clauses, or national
censorship laws. I would include Yuri On Ice,
as per the ongoing battle to depict the core
pairing openly, but also Legend of Korra’s
Korrasami. As the creators wanted an out, bisexual
female couple but had to settle for some hand
holding in the very last scene of the very last
episode. At least they got to kiss in the comic.
And of the shipping groups that piss me off…
Oblivious Ships don’t annoy me
so much but they still bother
me. This is when you have creators who include
a degree of platonic yearning where it’s not
clear how they overlooked ‘gay’ as an option. A
sub-sect of oblivious shipping is when you have
a creative team that is either so misogynistic
or so hyper-masculine that they procedurally
eliminate all female characters, or make
the women in the story so incredibly boring,
that there is no one else to ship
but the boys. Think of Supernatural.
And then, we have my least-favourite category
— Industrial Shipping. This is the one I’ve
been raising red flags over. An act of soulless,
corporate infringement on the identity-centric
needs for visible representation. This is what
I would refer to as ‘traditional gay baiting.’
And I’ve made multiple whole videos about
this. But, for a prime example, see Teen Wolf.
I consider this malicious enough that it’s a
pretty serious accusation to bring up — even when
it’s about media that I do like. But am I willing
to say that this is what’s going on in Sk8?
If it’s a deliberate branding tactic, then we
have to consider who they are marketing to.
And just like the largest consumer base of BL in
television, anime, manga, and manhua are women,
we can extrapolate that they would also be the
most significant consumers of gay-baited content.
Which isn’t a bad thing in and of itself.
There are more women than gay men in general,
so the fact that they occupy
a larger section of the market
is probably something we can just
take for granted. And similarly,
straight women are also the largest group
of creators who choose to depict gay men.
But if the suppliers of gay
media are straight women…
and the audience of gay media are
straight women… what about gay men?
This whole topic of shipping is
a sticky situation, isn’t it?
Not just because it COULD be queer baiting,
but because even the intentional ships aren’t
meant for a gay audience. In most cases,
they’re meant for a straight female audience.
Hell, a very good portion of
gay media that isn’t baited
is really meant for a female audience.
And a lot of it is even written by women.
Just going over some of the things
I’ve covered in past videos:
Killing Stalking, written by a woman.
Painter of the Night, written by a woman.
Yuri on Ice, written by a woman.
Banana Fish, written by a woman.
The Untamed, based on the
books written by a woman.
I realise all of those examples come from
Asian media, but this is not uniquely
an Asian phenomenon. Many, in fact most, of the
gay media that manages to reach a mainstream
audience in the west is also written by women.
Brokeback Mountain certainly comes to mind.
Gay Young Adult novels have become pretty popular
in recent years, but the biggest crossover hits
are almost exclusively written by women. Simon
VS The Homosapien Agenda, also known as Love,
Simon by Becki Albertali. Red, White and
Royal Blue by Casey McQuiston. The Simon Snow
novels by Rainbow Rowell, which are actually
high concept Harry Potter fanfiction where
Harry and Draco get together in the end. Though
in the Simon Snow books the Harry analogue,
Simon, has dragon wings, and the
Draco analogue, Baz, is a vampire.
Now, I’m not saying that women shouldn’t write
gay characters. I’ve read these books and I’ve
really enjoyed them. Look. I’ve got them right
here. But it is… interesting that the biggest gay
books to hit it really big these past years
have been written by women and not gay men.
Including bestsellers like The Song of
Achilles, which came out a decade ago,
when I first read it, but recently became a
mega hit when it was discovered by Book-Tock.
With the exception of books by Adam Silvera,
you’d be hard pressed to find gay books that
have gone mainstream. And it’s not like they
don’t exist. Look at this. Look at this shelf.
All of its gay. I’ve read them all and most
of them are really good. Some of them are damn
brilliant. But I ask, again, why is it that the
majority of readers, let alone the general public,
would probably only recognize the books written
by female authors. Even in the olden times,
books like The Frontrunner by Patricia Nell
Warren published in 1974, or The Persian Boy by
Mary Renault published in 1972. Gay books,
written about gay men, written by women.
So why don’t gay men get to represent themselves
in media? At least media that’s widely accepted
by the mainstream? Queer women get to
represent themselves. At least sometimes.
Look at animated hits like Stephen Universe,
or She-Ra and the Princesses of Power.
In fact we don’t really see a whole lot of
non-canonical shipping among female characters.
With the aforementioned gigantic
exception of Xena and Gabrielle.
And the ship that actually
became canon, Korrasammi.
But media has been much more accepting of out
lesbian characters in recent years. Not always,
for sure. Gay men dominated LGBT
representation in media for a long time.
Specifically white gay men. But in recent
years, producers, especially of television,
have realized that lesbian characters are the
perfect way for them to get points on the annual
GLAAD Media List for representation. Straight men
love lesbians, but usually only the ones who are
hyper sexualized, straight women, for the most
part, are pretty accepting of lesbians, and the
assumption is that everyone on the LGBTQIAPA… D…
2S+... spectrum will be accepting of them as well.
Look at this list. This is a pretty comprehensive
list of lesbian, or at least women who love women,
representation on TV. From shows as
diverse as Hannibal, Glee, All My Children,
Orange is the New Black, Killing Eve, Nancy Drew,
and Doctor Who. Granted, many of these characters
are written by straight male writers, so there is
definitely an element of lesbian fetishization to
be accounted for. But a whole lot of them
are written by lesbian or bisexual women.
Which allows the characters to experience
a range of storylines, many of which don’t
involve their lesbianism at all. Allowing many
of them to have some kind of a happy ending.
Which explains why there isn’t as much lesbian
shipping as there is gay shipping. There doesn’t
appear to be as much need for it. Where as a lot
of the highest profile representations of gay men
in media (Brokeback Mountain, Philadelphia,
Milk) certainly do NOT have happy endings.
Nothing of the sort. This is where
the Bury your Gays trope came from.
Which forces gay people, and people who want
to see happy gay relationships (oddly enough,
women) to create imaginary ones with characters
who are not actually confirmed to be gay.
And so ships are built. Whether they’re pretty
understandable, like with Steve and Bucky, Kirk
and Spock, Sokka and Zuko, Aang and Zuko… hell,
Kitara and Zuko, Toph and Zuko. Everyone and Zuko.
Oh, and one lesbian ship that did happen and I
was 100% on board for, Yara and Daenerys from
Game of Thrones. Should have happened. Should
have been canon. Would have been amazing. And
maybe if Dany had been banging a ship captain
she wouldn't have forgotten about the iron fleet.
Anyway.
Not all ships are all that obvious
though. Many times there’s not a
hint of evidence but people want the
relationship to be a thing anyway,
like my own personal ship of James and Butch
from the Pokémon anime. Who are obviously bitter
exes. Or Rachel and Quinn from Glee. Magneto and
Professor X. Cap and Ironman. Spiderman and Venom.
There’s not really any textual,
or subtextual evidence that these
pairings could ever actually be a thing,
but since we need to create ships anyway,
why not go the whole way and make some up
out of whole cloth? For instance, in my point
of view anyway, there’s a few pairings that I
personally ship in the works of J*K R*W*L*I*N*G.
Sirius Black and Remus Lupin are obvious
candidates. As well as Albus Potter and
Scorpis Malfoy in the broadway play, Cursed
Child. Which, apparently, has kind of been
confirmed now that the play has been condensed
into a one night thing. I cannot confirm myself,
since I havent seen it with my own eyes,
but my broadway gays have told me this.
And of course the original ship to come out of J*K
R*W*L*I*N*G’s work, Harry and Draco themselves.
Now I never understood this, personally. I
never felt any romantic tension between the
two of them but apparently everyone else on the
internet did. So much so that the fan-fiction
fervour that arose online actually sparked a
few producers to insert queer baiting into the
text of their media on purpose to bring in
fans. Such as with Teen Wolf and Sherlock.
Fans have written, literally, billions of words
about these ships online. Whole libraries full
of stories. All of this work to try and get
some gay male couples to have a happy ending.
And even this fan fiction, for the
most part, is written by women.
Gay men, for sure, contribute, but the vast
majority of these fan-written works are written
by women. Straight women, and lesbians funnily
enough. And some of it goes very mainstream.
Like the Blood Right book series, which
started its life as Finn/Poe fan fiction
before being redeveloped and
picked up by a publisher.
And again, I don’t want to say women
shouldn’t write gay characters.
The kawaii version of gayness created
by these women has gone a long way to
creating more acceptance of queer people,
mainly queer men, among straight women.
But sometimes it gets kind of… creepy. After
I released the Killing Stalking video you
wouldn’t believe the amount of (mostly) straight
women who told me they loved Killing Stalking
because it let them explore extreme kinks without
the associated trauma of a woman being involved.
Which is just… no. Don’t do that.
Do not use gay men as experiments.
In real life or fiction. We’re not marionettes
to play with for your amusement. Especially when
something like Killing Stalking becomes a huge
success and media producers might look and say
“Ah. So this is how we should portray the gays.”
Gay readers seem to love messy gay characters.
Gay readers even love problematic gay characters.
I sure do — I ship Hannibal and Will! Where
the line is drawn is difficult to nail down
though. But if we — gay men, women, lesbians,
trans writers, and even straight men — are
going to exist in a community of writers
and content creators without gatekeepers,
we need to be able to recognize how certain
identities would like to be respected.
And while there aren’t any hard rules
about this, the best way to pick up the
guidelines are to listen to what these
people have to say about themselves.
I realize this is heavily focused around the
psychological condition of gay men. Who are,
admittedly, probably the most privileged of the
whole community. However — my concern comes from
the development of a bunch of baby gays who are
coming of age now and in the future. With them
in mind, they are going to have to fight against
a lot of patriarchal or even toxic masculinity.
(Insert Sean Penn quote)
Ugh.
And insofar as queer acceptance is constructed
around assimilation into straight values,
the modern depiction of gay-baited
pseudo-representation, constructed by straight
people to feed into a straight industry, is going
to perpetuate those straight values. And it is
MUCH more difficult to un-indoctronate oneself
from internalized homophobia than it is to model
oneself after constructive, and realistic
archatypes of openly-expressed queerness.
Because make no mistake, a growing trend
of gay-baiting DOES communicate to gay
audiences that the only way you can be visible
in society… is to be straight. And coupled with
the instances of visible gayness in awards-bait
media where gay characters can only exist if
they’re sad — we can only be ‘happy’ if we’re
straight. Or at least not confirmed to be gay.
And even in this day and age of tolerance, we
exist in a world that is consistently trying
to shove us back into the closet,
to define the acceptable expressions
of our gayness, or to put us in dollhouses
for the bemusement of a cis-het audience.
And so… we ship.
We ship characters created by
straight writers. And indeed,
straight writers are more likely to bury their
gays. Is their perspective of queerness that it
involves suffering insofar that suffering
is the direct result of that queerness?
You will find bury your gays’ much more commonly
in visual media. This becomes especially true
as a particular piece of media
is meant to receive awards.
Following the critical and awards-success
of Philadelphia, starring Tom Hanks,
this seemed to be what Hollywood really latched
on to as far as what it was willing to depict.
Didn’t help that Hollywood’s first big
gay love story, Brokeback mountain,
which not only featured one dead gay, a
surviving gay who had to feel bad about it, and
closeted, forbidden love, but
it was written by a woman.
And as a piece of media made by a woman,
developed into a film made by straight people,
featuring straight actors, you naturally
miss out on a lot of the nuances
of being gay. Like, I don’t know,
being blissfully ignorant to the
consequences of bottoming without using
lube after eating a plate full of beans.
But Brokeback Mountain itself is a great instance
of the ethics behind writing outside your lived
experiences. Writer Annie Proulx actually
spoke out against a trend among gay men
who shipped her Brokeback Characters Enis
and Jack. She did not take kindly to gay men
who wrote fan fiction and re-wrote her ending that
they both survived and lived happily ever after.
Having a dead gay was so important to her
that she wrote angry articles about it.
She refused to listen to the voices of
identities whom she used to expand her platform.
Though yes these are her characters, Proulx was
writing without the awareness that gay people,
go figure, wanted an alternative story where they
could be happy. She didn’t seem to understand why
gay men would be so interested in re-writing
her tragedy into an ending about happy gays.
By all means, it isn’t just women who do this.
Call Me By Your Name was written by a straight
man. And there were no burried gays, but
there was a closeted romance and sad gays.
And because, for a significant amount of time,
a dead gay was the only thing we
could really expect from major media,
as a reaction, we had to ship. The alternative
to shipping was a world that believed that gay
people’s only role in life was to offer up some
saucy fashion advice and then die tragically.
Shipping our way to a world where we could be
happy, however, may have snapped in the other
direction. Particularly in publishing. Where
queer writers are interested in exploring gay
characters as they would factor into different
genres of fiction, and exploring queer identity
itself insofar as it exists in a world that
is designed to cater to cis-het people.
However straight creators either
lean to the melodramatically tragic,
or the melodramatically…fluffy.
Which is how you get a whole generation
of gays who have deblitating FOMO
because their life experiences did not match
the experiences about gayness set by straight
women with a kawaii idea of two gay people.
So there’s this kind of perfect storm of angst as
different areas of media interplay off each other
and send conflicting messages. You
have high-brow fiction telling us
to expect tragedy. Which. Thanks for the anxiety.
You have mass-consumption media which takes
gay emotions and removes gay expiriences,
leaving a husk of empty gestures and
unanswered questions which feels more
like a gambling addiction than
even implied representation.
And then, in response to that, you have
publishing. Where gay authors are trying to
depict their own experiences with queerness,
but where a lot of content being created is either
an overly positive response to gay tragedy-media,
or as filling in the blanks that
media like Sk8 refuses to fill in.
And in either case that results in this weird
rose-tinted world where the beginning and end of
the queer expirience is defined by your ability to
have a boyfriend and look cute being gay together.
And sure. Yes I did just make a video about how
we need to have more queer representation in
media directed at children. But just like there
are hordes of queer people who literally always
knew that they were queer (myself included),
it’s just as valid that some people literally
don’t have a clue they were gay until they’re
in their twenties, thirties, forties, whenever.
And while I’d like to say that it’s perfectly
valid that teenagers like Reki and Langa
don’t have their crap together yet,
what about the other two heavily
implied pairings that the show is counting
on the audience shipping the crap out of?
To say nothing of how strongly the show sets up
Reki and Langa in visually-romantic settings.
And I’d like to say that Yuri!!! On Ice has every
right to be as understated as it wants to be,
because sometimes you do want a relationship
drama where the drama does not come from the
relationship. And this would be fine if this
was not the (almost) only way we had to consume
queer characters. And that understated ‘subtlety’
just starts to feel like a cop-out after a while.
It would be nice if this wasn’t
the excuse every. Single. Time.
And because these instances are so
subtle, either by design or necessity,
we, L, G, B, T’s, and Q’s have
to endure a barrage of straights
trying to beat us down. All we really want is
the ability to project our shared experiences
to re-enforce our community bonds. But
somewhere, there’s a straight person saying
that we’re ‘forcing gayness’ into everything.
But the only reason we have to read queerness
into anything is because it’s been ‘forced OUT’
of society for the last couple hundred years.
Or that we get ‘crazy’ when people
refuse to see the obvious coding of
clearly gay characters. Because
it’s not enough to say ‘hey.
This experience really reminds me of some
formative moments of my adolescence.’
There’s some straight person who’s never been
worried about being rejected by their family
saying that Luca is absolutely a cis-het
mood. And you’re crazy for thinking otherwise!
And in order for us to consume actual feel-good
gay media that is even remotely happy,
we have two options. Watch fictional gay people
having expiriences we’re never going to have,
or fictional presumed-straight people having
pretty gay expiriences that look a
whole lot like the ones we have had.
Not to mention that there is a quiet
homophobia to the celebration of gay-baiting.
Our implicit romances are being framed under
the pretence of being something forbidden.
And I have to say that there is this kind
of insensitivity around the popularity of
forbidden romance. Because here in the queer
community, forbidden romance is kind of
the EXACT OPPOSITE of what we’re trying
to accomplish with our fight for rights.
That we need to work so damn incrementally
to get real representation is so
frustrating. By now we should have
gay mainstream movies on the regular,
gay TV shows that arent just about
teaching straight men how to wash
their asses. Stories that aren’t just
fantasy outcomes, or horrible outcomes.
But no. We’re stuck here arguing about fish
boys, and searching for justification that
mens’ figureskating JUST MIGHT be stuffed
with glorious queers, and fighting people
who insist they’re straight every step of
the way. We’re no further ahead than we
were when Queer as Folk was on TV and Brokeback
Mountain came out in 2005. SEVENTEEN YEARS AGO.
Oh god I feel old.
You’d think, especially in the world of anime
production, the success of shows like Given,
both its animated and live-action adaptation,
would light a fire under producers and make
them realize theres a hell of a market
out there for non-baited gay content.
And I’m not letting Hollywood off the hook either.
Half the damn city is gay. Where.
Are. My. Gay. Superheroes Marvel!?
My marketing brain tells me they’re
missing out on so much money,
seeing how the writing is on the wall when it
comes to BL fiction. Even here in North America,
there’s a consumer base far larger than
you would expect for subtitled cute-boy
gay-drama from Korea and Tailand
and Taiwan and, yes even Japan.
Which forces me through a mental
obstacle course to reason why
they wouldn’t be capitalising on this! And the
conclusion I come to is that they are making a
comfortable profit off of our titillation. That
this rash of gay-baiting is not only deliberate,
calculated, and modeled, but that we are
encouraged to do it. We, the audience,
are encouraged to fill in the blanks that
some… corporation has left empty on purpose.
And the fact that this kind of gay-bait is
looped in with visible queer representation
isn’t unintentional either. Producers want
this to be tied to other actively queer media
to lend it validity, and feed into the fanbase
which already ships what they are intended to.
Having Reki and Langa doesn’t mean we have
more gay representation. Having Hiyori and
Ikuya isn’t more gay representation. It’s media
gaslighting. It’s malicious. It’s dishonest.
It’s fraudulent. It’s telling us we
should be satisfied with effigies.
And the worst part is that it’s working.
It’s so successful to the point where
corporations encourage us to ship
real people. Half of BTS is shipped together.
And once upon a time One Direction, when they
realised that their fanbase shipped them,
even played into it by hugging each other
a lot. And even kissing sometimes. Which has
become a staple of almost all k-pop boy-bands.
Boy band personalities are all developed by focus
groups so they might as well be
fiction right? Why not ship them?
But then there arises the problem of shipping real
human beings where; (a) you remove their ability
to self-declare identity; (b) if it is something
like a boy band, or two television costars,
you’re feeding into a corperation’s exploitation
of sexual identity as a marketing ploy, and;
(c) it is a reduction of gayness to an object
of fascination, a charicature or steryeotype,
rather than how some people live their
lives because that’s who they are.
So again… is… shipping… bad…?
Honestly when it comes to you in your room
alone at night I say the sky’s the limit.
Ship as much as you want.
Ship as much as you need.
Even when it comes to making ships that, like
the Blood Right series, go on to have their
IP serial numbers filed off and made into
their own standing property, by all means.
Show Marvel, and Star Wars,
and other gay-baiters that
there is an audience out there
that they’re missing out on.
But when it DOES come to depicting characters
that are outside your lived experience,
all I ask is that you please be respectful of
these communities’ need for self-determination.
And if you do reach critical acclaim, please
help promote other gay, lesbian, bisexual,
and trans creators themselves. And honestly, most
authors already do just that. And the favouratism
of women when it comes to depicting gay
men is more of an ‘industry’ problem.
My concerns are primarily directed
at the ways these industries
use shipping as a way to manipulate fanbases.
So if you are going to ship, I would advise you to
be aware of which series ‘want’ you to ship their
characters, because you may very well be nothing
more than a cog in their marketing machine.
And you’re a person. Not a billboard. And I don’t
like that some media producers
treat their audiences like that.
But how can we separate media that is actively
trying to manipulate their audience into shipping,
media that is actively trying to subvert
conservative values, and media which is full
of well-written and flushed out characters
who share strong chemistry with each other?
The only answer I can offer is that… It… depends?
On like… a lot of things. But mostly,
it depends on intention. Which sucks
because that’s the only thing
that you really can't gauge.
Especially that, if we’re gonna get philosophical,
people are rarely honest with themselves.
I’m making a monetized video about how it’s bad
that corporations are using queerness to sell
a product without actually either promoting
queer identity, or promoting queer creations.
Is there really a way to objectively say
that I’m not just making this video for
the money? Other than the fact that my
YouTube ad revenue is NOT impressive.
But there’s no way for you, the audience,
to verify if I’m being disingenuous or not.
If I’m baiting you anymore or any less than
these producers I’ve been ranting about.
I’ve spent the last two years on
here, on literally every live stream,
talking about how my dream is to make movies
and series about queer characters that aren’t
JUST about being queer. A way to give back
to the community, create movies and series,
the likes of which I never got to see growing
up. Hell, I still don’t get to see them much.
But I haven’t actually gone
ahead and done that, now have I?
You can assume I will actually
give back to the community,
create works for the community that go
above and beyond youtube. But will I?
Just like we assume that creators who encourage
shipping, either actively via baiting, or
inactively by just supporting fan communities,
have the best interest of the queer
community at heart. But do they really?
Most probably do! But some probably don’t…
How the hell are we supposed to know?
We used to think that J*K*R*W*I*G
was the biggest queer ally in the
world, and oh boy did that blow up in our faces.
Instead, why not put some power
in the hands of queer creators?
So we don't have to guess if a pairing
is supposed to be a couple for real,
if we’re being baited by a corporation, or if
we really are just reading too much into things.
So shipping is probably fine, as long as
we’re dealing with fictional characters.
We keep asking for the real thing, we keep
begging for it. For years. Decades. We say “please
let me see myself on screen without it being
about dying, gay bashing, being depressed, or some
completely illogical teen fantasy. Please.” But
we don’t get it. So we have to play make-believe.
But why play make believe when we
can make the real thing ourselves?
So I’m starting a production company. Telos
Pictures. Which will focus exclusively on
queer stories written by queer people for queer
audiences. And if the straights wanna watch too,
by all means. But I think there’s a pretty
sizable audience out there for this kind of thing.
After all, 14% of the United States is African
American – and Tyler Perry used that to create
an empire of afro-american-centric
media produced for black audiences.
However… Recent polling shows that 1 in 6
adults born after 1989 identify as LGBT.
That’s 16 percent! Let’s see what we can do!
As much as I believe that people outside the
LGBT community can and should write about us,
I believe the best way to communicate our
experience is to create media that they can use to
help expand their understanding of gay, lesbian,
trans, bisexual, and nonbinary expiriences.
Now I’m going need some help, and I don’t expect
to burst onto the scene with some million dollar
movies. We’ll start small and build our way
up. If you’re interested in supporting this,
or just want to find out more, visit the
IndieGoGo link in the description of this video.
We’ve got a lot in the works, and I’d love
to have you on board. This is a team effort.
Let’s show those heteros we mean business.